Intentionally fouling a team during their offensive possession is a strategy that basketball teams have employed for many years. Though popularised in the National Basketball Association (NBA), the technique has also found its way into Collegiate Basketball in recent years. The purpose of intentionally fouling is often to slow down opponent scoring and expose poor Free-Throw shooters. Despite previous studies using Markov Chains or analyzing intentional fouling in the NBA, there is a lack of research combining these methods with collegiate men’s basketball rules, particularly the one-and-one bonus. This paper will examine the optimal times to start intentionally fouling when trailing, using Markov Chains and additional statistical analysis of data from the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 1 Men’s Basketball (NCAA D1 MBB). Additionally, this study will account for the Bonus and Double Bonus rules specific to NCAA Men’s Basketball. Play-by-play data was scraped from over 4,000 games in the 2024-25 season to calculate statistics that would help identify the probabilities of different plays. Transition matrices were created to determine the expected points in a possession with and without fouls. By categorizing data based on the time left in the game (full game, last 5 minutes, etc.), a strategy was developed to identify the optimal time for a team to benefit from fouling. Additionally, the matrices were used to calculate the maximum FT% of a player for which it would be optimal to foul, rather than to give up a possession.
